Title: Will's 2019 Musical Musings
Date: 2019-12-27T15:24:12Z
Category: Music
Tags: EoY
Author: Will Mathewson
Summary: Musings on 2019's music
Slug: 20191227-Wills_2019_Musings

I thought I'd put together some of my favourite music from 2019. This list is in no particular
order and is by no means exhaustive! Much of this music has been talked about in other EoY lists,
but not all of it. Hopefully you find something new in reading this. If you don't, well done you
for having such good taste in music.

I've written more about certain bands/albums/EPs than others ü§∑‚Äç‚ôÇÔ∏è This isn't an indication on
my liking them more or less --- it's more an indication on which I've read more reviews of and
drawn inspriation from...

### [Julia Jacklin - Crushing](https://open.spotify.com/album/6qaaubiJlYCOdYWdqZDl3h?si=x5o9iVjDRaGkOf6dqA58hQ)

"Oh, another breakup album. Taylor Swift called: she wants her trademark back" is what a lesser man
would say on the premise of this album. (Or me, if I were scraping the bottom of the barrel for a
put down.)

Yes, making a breakup album is not exactly breaking virgin ground, but Julia Jacklin does it with
aplomb and raw, heartfelt energy. From the first song, _Body_, opening the chapter about the
breakup, through to singing about later stages of a deteriorating relationship in _Don‚Äôt Know How
To Keep Loving You_, it makes you feel like it was your relationship that fell apart; almost
holding up the mirror to your own life to trigger an existential crisis about your own
relationships.

### [Dry Cleaning - Boundary Road Snacks and Drinks](https://open.spotify.com/album/0vohgJmzfuBhJ0yh1xt5y2?si=C6htdNTWRWK86d--SjVumQ)

Surprisingly not a member of the Speedy Wunderground label,
Fantastic band, both their EPs this year were really good

### [Squid - Town Centre](https://open.spotify.com/album/0DDNGDhGjFhgtehw3A3i9N?si=WqsUxq12S9qoYMAU6HpxMA)

I've been binging them a lot recently. Kind of avant-garde post-punk, hard to describe, but I can't
get enough of it. I'd recommend checking out their (admittedly small) back catalogue.

### [The Comet Is Coming - Trust In the Lifeforce of the Deep Mystery](https://open.spotify.com/album/2mvz0NPBCPTbSEgRViuDLK?si=sRBnCqBBRe6eZH-HeLN7_g)

I got really into jazz this year and this is the some of the finest stuff out there. Shabaka
Hutchings leads this collective which blends all manner of genres together to form one glorious
hole.

### [Theon Cross - Fyah](https://open.spotify.com/album/6SSL6yakuFFhVndOVpsisM?si=4eqaUjNYRG2OM1wjrQNMXg)

Moses Boyd & Nubya Garcia both feature on this album and they are 2 of the best jazz artists around
right now, complementing Theon Cross's tuba playing exceptionally well.

### [Joe Armon-Jones - Turn to Clear View](https://open.spotify.com/album/4yws2FxiYwtH0rhSCe651X?si=UfADEqr_Qh6NiKaoL4saAQ)

I think I was at school with his brother. Another mover & shaker in the London jazz scene, also a
member of the Ezra Collective. All round great jazz.

### [Fontaines D.C. - Dogrel](https://open.spotify.com/album/1i9PDv6BO8c8Y5lxMG6Lej?si=lzrjO_BuS4SRIyACdeu62Q)

BBC 6 Music's album of the year, very well-deserved. The opening lines of "Dublin in the rain is
mine / A pregnant city with a Catholic mind" is, in my opinion, one of the best possible ways to
start an album. I want every album to start like this.

### [Aldous Harding - Designer](https://open.spotify.com/album/0QNJa03XQeMOuQhi9izThh?si=ESdMUFYWRpKZalU_B-qOiA)

The Barrel is one of the best songs ever. That's all I need to say about this album.

### [Weyes Blood - Titanic Rising](https://open.spotify.com/album/53VKICyqCf91sVkTdFrzKX?si=iYPBACRNSOO2OUjQiuZN5A)

Pure 70s style orchestral pop and it's the bee's knees. I'd highly recommend watching the video for
Everyday: it's a love letter to 70s/80s horror films.

### [Cate le Bon - Reward](https://open.spotify.com/album/082FaK20Q5pWBugogTQbGW?si=xcdKrcfUSHW0zzROvZVv9A)

Had this stuck in my head all week, large amounts of Bowie & Talking Heads influence in this.

### [Black Country, New Road](https://open.spotify.com/artist/3PP6ghmOlDl2jaKaH0avUN?si=Q3OLPgv5R5-hvctGQA0MnA)

I don't even know how to describe them, but I've got tickets to see them at The Mash House in
  January, hype.

### [The Murder Capital - When I Have Fears](https://open.spotify.com/album/17ozByfYT9iEhfGNcT6mdz?si=1RLxG92bScSMpgf7x3H4RA)

Old school post-punk, fans of The Smiths & Joy Division will enjoy.

### [Sports Team](https://open.spotify.com/artist/04JIxSs2P0iteVWtaskfeh?si=MNhY3GrASISUcpsemCQOoQ)

Classic indie rock, not doing anything necessarily spectacular or revolutionary, but a lot of fun.

### [King Gizzard & The Lizard Wizard - Fishing For Fishies](https://open.spotify.com/album/4Tgecn5UTVK57G0IV3MyB6?si=oLA0Os0EStqNXAkOJ07d-g)

Boogie music about climate change, better than it sounds.

### [King Gizzard & The Lizard Wizard - Infest The Rats' Nest](https://open.spotify.com/album/4IgoNZskxob4QMPaRL39Dz?si=wkB7LalzR2aCtuk5hEyVVg)

Heavy metal in the style of Iron Maiden, Metallica, etc. Still about climate change, but 25x
heavier than FFF, phenomenal live.

### [Warmduscher - Tainted Lunch](https://open.spotify.com/album/0awOXgqBtA1bUu44W08g6q?si=T9GgiqRxTAOJZGsU-ck8Ug)

The frontman is as eccentric as the music he makes. Iggy Pop opens the album with a wandering
preamble, what more do you want?

### [Liz Lawrence - Pity Party](https://open.spotify.com/album/0OoiqQEy97c07vOc5b9VRh?si=iFKPB1fERNOvEIb0-K_xpg)

Kind of indie pop, I suppose? USP & None of My Friends are stand out singles.

### [The Specials - Encore](https://open.spotify.com/album/2K7Z8kR4tsXDIkS0jWLkwZ?si=2zqcoHHgQbiaQxUZsRey9g)

Classic 80s two-tone/ska. They're still great, still angry about the state of the world, still
singing about it - thank God.

### [Stella Donnelly - Beware of the Dogs](https://open.spotify.com/album/1pKIMs0GEePXjDC2EiYEb7?si=NPi-ZbvtR7eZ_S7YJNgOhA)

I just love her voice, fortunately her tracks also are great. Singing songs about topics such as
sexual assault, exploitation of women √† la Harvey Weinstein and her abortion in her late
teens/early 20s.

### [Black Midi - Schlagenheim](https://open.spotify.com/album/14LuwckQuyWIvVlKrYuLzP?si=eWie66cwSbWDcosT4xcm-Q)

Noise/math rock, very experimental, all good if that's your thing (it's one of my things).

### [Girl Band - The Talkies](https://open.spotify.com/album/7CcsQ8Y3s65IZCoaBrZuIT?si=YJtLEkeZRuqz0YHKTjSYkg)

The album opens with a recording of the lead singer having a panic attack in the recording studio.
More noise rock, still experimental. Their first album a few years ago inspired the likes of Black
Midi and more.

### [Brittany Howard - Jamie](https://open.spotify.com/album/5xQrvHK0YbNaFslrvJYMNR?si=6YICl0uiRhGNdxk9_oyVXQ)

Of Alabama Shakes fame, this has similar sounds to her previous band. Also whatever 13th Century
Metal is, cracking tune though.

### [Girl Ray - Girl](https://open.spotify.com/album/5uToqdsQXa0200HXDFZE9l?si=m1j0g9wHTVaC38zhFsouxg)

Kind of dream/bedroom pop. What even are genres these days?

### [Faye Webster - Atlanta Millionaires Club](https://open.spotify.com/album/4vt0V1SmkaK1Y440P5Nsb4?si=8fM2OxlHShquPeZjtHcYqg)

I refer to this as surfer country and I love it. Also, I think it's my favourite album cover of the
year.

### [Awkward Family Portraits - Everything We've Done Up Until Now Except What We've Done Since](https://open.spotify.com/album/5cpr8BQn1rSfNExCwJ41CZ?si=8xiLXRBzSKGwNhyCoksPvg)

Glasgow bluegrass band singing about things like climate change and alcoholism. Because why not.
Saw them live, a lot of fun, I have a video if you want.

### [Oh Sees - Face Stabber](https://open.spotify.com/album/2asqm6ydqbRKZKbXfGIhrX?si=NL5tgGHHTMeissEKi_l9iw)

This album opens with them sampling a squeaky toy and that kind of defines the album going
forwards. Lots of psychedelic & progressive rock influences. There's a squeaky toy, why are you
still reading this?

### [Pip Blom - Boat](https://open.spotify.com/album/4wFv5bgaDQX7qABoTMTEsN?si=Q-IXMQBrRkGI2pckXQGXRg)

I missed out on seeing these guys live - God damn it, Nathan, this would have been better than DnD.
Dutch indie pop band, playful pop covering actual angst.

### [Trash Kit - Horizon](https://open.spotify.com/album/2Fkm5Qr2HJjscx4GTkTEHe?si=Qup2ElUSTAiV0dePxnmXzw)

Having spent time in their own bands like Shopping (check them out), Trash Kit came together for
their own weird blend of post-punk, Afrobeat and more. The drums are slightly out of kilter and the
vocals are more akin to sprechgesang than singing. I love it.

### [Gauche - A People's History of Gauche](https://open.spotify.com/album/6iFUgVpsYPKALrEWZX86KI?si=WPNuvboiRHmd5gEaOCBGuA)

Similar to Trash Kit, it's polished but still slightly off kilter. Mad post-punk but all kinds of
fun. The upbeat music covers the underlying song topics.

### [Hemlock Ernst & Kenny Segal - Back At the House](https://open.spotify.com/album/0LVKPyfLFEy6PQ19z8Zawq?si=U8mlD0A6QGyqDpCVg1sgVQ)

Hemlock Ernst, better known as the singer of Future Islands, finally released a full album having
featured on countless alternative hip-hop tracks. It was everything I've been waiting for from him.

### [Tacocat - This Mess Is a Place](https://open.spotify.com/album/7l3uVSD4WCT8pBvrAMlxnB?si=sIkkG6mJSCe0G6YnRUC7bw)

Upbeat indie pop. Also their band name is palindromic, which is fun.

### [GIRLI - Odd One Out](https://open.spotify.com/album/3jOfFcZ3wVfyyU3yftEKYf?si=eG58hQ-NTjW3ipB_RJljIw)

This is featured in a Spotify playlist called Glitter Bomb, which should tell you enough about this
in itself. Electrifying pop-electronica, the kind of thing listened to by girls finishing six form,
freshers and, apparently, my flatmate and me.

### [The Divine Comedy - Office Politics](https://open.spotify.com/album/4pnX8RkztAQj5EgyKKPHyL?si=j72GoxNISOaU1DveKLPdEg)

Neil Hannon again plays around with whichever genres he feels like. Supposedly a concept album
about an office - one to listen to at work and try to match up the characters with your colleagues?

### [Mac DeMarco - Here Comes the Cowboy](https://open.spotify.com/album/67PsnkYVPNpEsZffyTWGgW?si=QfruTwwlSMCU-Jrg-qrzIA)

Despite the allegations of ripping off Mitski's album from last year, Mac has clearly decided to
just write music for himself rather than sounding like Mac DeMarco. Also, there's a song called
Choo Choo.

### [Loyle Carner - Not Waving, But Drowning](https://open.spotify.com/album/1kokRXXxrJzhxdMo0vsVDV?si=-30WHPDOTluNmkwKi2PawA)

I'm convinced Loyle Carner can do no wrong. He continues to produce fantastic, heartfelt music and
is possibly one of the best voices in UK hip-hop right now. (Sorry, Duncan, I know you're all about
CASISDEAD.)

### [Little Simz - GREY Area](https://open.spotify.com/album/4Wwm4xg2748zhYuzDRFTgY?si=2tP_ER0mTASncLQeewMQAQ)

I love Little Simz. I'm still gutted that she didn't end up opening for Gorillaz in Glasgow. Maybe
I was just late. We'll never know. Anyway, listen to this, it's good for you.

### [Sleaford Mods - Eton Alive](https://open.spotify.com/album/3QiU8JCc97mcqfJ3caEMzs?si=gU2Ax26CTyi7y8dLbUIISA)

There's a certain irony in my adding of this album to this list, but if I didn't, I would be
purposefully leaving off one of the top 10 albums of the year. The music almost sounds as Northern
as the vocalist. It's grating, almost gruff, but it delivers some fantastic commentary on modern
Britain from a working class perspective.
