Title: Will's 2019 Musical Musings
Date: 2019-12-27T15:24:12Z
Category: Music
Tags: EoY, 2019
Author: Will Mathewson
Summary: Musings on 2019's music
Status: published

I thought I'd put together some of my favourite music from 2019. This list is in no particular order
and is by no means exhaustive! Much of this music has been talked about in other EoY lists, but not
all of it. Hopefully you find something new in reading this. If you don't, well done you for having
such good taste in music.

I've written more about certain bands/albums/EPs than others :man_shrugging: This isn't an
indication on my liking them more or less --- it's more an indication on which I've read more
reviews of and have drawn inspriation from or which I've spent more idle time dwelling on what to
write. I initially wrote this as a post for a work channel about music then thought I'd use it as
the basis for the first post of a music blog. I've gone back and expanded some rather brief
statements about the music, but not all of them --- hence the short reviews in places.

### [Julia Jacklin - Crushing](https://open.spotify.com/album/6qaaubiJlYCOdYWdqZDl3h?si=x5o9iVjDRaGkOf6dqA58hQ)

"Oh, another breakup album. Taylor Swift called: she wants her trademark back" is what a lesser man
would say on the premise of this album. (Or me, if I were scraping the bottom of the barrel for a
put down.)

Yes, making a breakup album is not exactly breaking virgin ground, but Julia Jacklin does it with
aplomb and raw, heartfelt energy. From the first song, _Body_, opening the chapter about the
breakup, through to singing about later stages of a deteriorating relationship in _Don’t Know How To
Keep Loving You_, it makes you feel like it was your relationship that fell apart; almost holding up
the mirror to your own life to trigger an existential crisis about your own relationships.

### [Dry Cleaning - Boundary Road Snacks and Drinks](https://open.spotify.com/album/0vohgJmzfuBhJ0yh1xt5y2?si=C6htdNTWRWK86d--SjVumQ)

Surprisingly not a member of the Speedy Wunderground label, Dry Cleaning put their own spin on the
current post-punk revival. From what I've read, their lead vocalist has no particular singing
experience ~~and it shows~~, opting to speak the lyrics instead with a manner that sounds almost
bored as she recites them. This dull demeanour only furthers to highlight the sardonic lyrical
content of the songs.

### [Squid - Town Centre](https://open.spotify.com/album/0DDNGDhGjFhgtehw3A3i9N?si=WqsUxq12S9qoYMAU6HpxMA)

Billed as one of the Sounds of 2020, Squid seem to be the poster child of the current British
indie/post-punk scene. They've recorded with the Speedy Wunderground label, even convincing them to
break from their singles-only mould to record this EP. Squid started as, in their own words, a "bad
jazz band" and one can hear a decent amount of jazz influences in their sound. From the opening
instrumental track of _Savage_, featuring a haunting cornet over the top, through the fast-paced
drumming and further melodic trumpets in _Match Bet_ via _The Cleaner_ (**SO I CAN DANCE**) to the
slowed closing of _Rodeo_, this EP is utterly enthralling. There's good reason that _Match Bet_ has
been getting a lot of air time on BBC Radio 6.

I am beyond excited for what they might produce in 2020 and I'm desperately hunting for tickets to
see them live.

### [The Comet Is Coming - Trust In the Lifeforce of the Deep Mystery](https://open.spotify.com/album/2mvz0NPBCPTbSEgRViuDLK?si=sRBnCqBBRe6eZH-HeLN7_g)

I got really into jazz this year and this is the some of the finest stuff out there. Shabaka
Hutchings (a soon-to-be jazz legend) leads this collective which blends all manner of genres
together to form one glorious whole.

### [Theon Cross - Fyah](https://open.spotify.com/album/6SSL6yakuFFhVndOVpsisM?si=4eqaUjNYRG2OM1wjrQNMXg)

Moses Boyd & Nubya Garcia both feature on this album and they are 2 of the best jazz artists around
right now, complementing Theon Cross's tuba playing exceptionally well.

### [Joe Armon-Jones - Turn to Clear View](https://open.spotify.com/album/4yws2FxiYwtH0rhSCe651X?si=UfADEqr_Qh6NiKaoL4saAQ)

I think I was at school with his brother. Another mover & shaker in the London jazz scene, also a
member of the Ezra Collective. All round great jazz.

### [Fontaines D.C. - Dogrel](https://open.spotify.com/album/1i9PDv6BO8c8Y5lxMG6Lej?si=lzrjO_BuS4SRIyACdeu62Q)

BBC 6 Music's album of the year and very well-deserved. The opening lines of

> "Dublin in the rain is mine / A pregnant city with a Catholic mind"

is, in my opinion, one of the best possible ways to start an album. I want every album to start like
this. Yes, even music not at all connected with Ireland.

### [Aldous Harding - Designer](https://open.spotify.com/album/0QNJa03XQeMOuQhi9izThh?si=ESdMUFYWRpKZalU_B-qOiA)

The Barrel is one of the best songs of the decade. That's all I need to say about this album.

### [Weyes Blood - Titanic Rising](https://open.spotify.com/album/53VKICyqCf91sVkTdFrzKX?si=iYPBACRNSOO2OUjQiuZN5A)

Pure 70s style orchestral pop and it's the bee's knees. I'd highly recommend watching the video for
Everyday: it's a love letter to 70s/80s horror films.

### [Cate le Bon - Reward](https://open.spotify.com/album/082FaK20Q5pWBugogTQbGW?si=xcdKrcfUSHW0zzROvZVv9A)

Had this stuck in my head all week, large amounts of Bowie & Talking Heads influence in this.

### [Black Country, New Road](https://open.spotify.com/artist/3PP6ghmOlDl2jaKaH0avUN?si=Q3OLPgv5R5-hvctGQA0MnA)

I don't even know how to describe them, but I've got tickets to see them at The Mash House in
January. Hype.

### [The Murder Capital - When I Have Fears](https://open.spotify.com/album/17ozByfYT9iEhfGNcT6mdz?si=1RLxG92bScSMpgf7x3H4RA)

The number of times I've finished this album then gone straight back to the top and listened to it
again is more than once. It's an album that changes sound from front to back, starting with an
almost cinematic, progressive sound before hitting the driving bass line, drums and guitar.

If you're a fan of The Smiths or Joy Division, I would highly recommend this album.

### [Sports Team](https://open.spotify.com/artist/04JIxSs2P0iteVWtaskfeh?si=MNhY3GrASISUcpsemCQOoQ)

Classic indie rock, I don't really think they're doing anything necessarily spectacular or
revolutionary, but I think they're a lot of fun.
Also, [this Guardian article kind of sums them up for me.](https://www.theguardian.com/music/2019/dec/27/sports-team-the-indie-stars-romanticising-middle-england)
Similarly, their frontman was _born_ to be a frontman. Can you tell they all went to Cambridge?
(Genuine question.)

### [King Gizzard & The Lizard Wizard - Fishing For Fishies](https://open.spotify.com/album/4Tgecn5UTVK57G0IV3MyB6?si=oLA0Os0EStqNXAkOJ07d-g)

Boogie music about climate change, better than it sounds.

### [King Gizzard & The Lizard Wizard - Infest The Rats' Nest](https://open.spotify.com/album/4IgoNZskxob4QMPaRL39Dz?si=wkB7LalzR2aCtuk5hEyVVg)

Heavy metal in the style of Iron Maiden, Metallica, etc. Still about climate change, but 25x heavier
than FFF, phenomenal live.

### [Warmduscher - Tainted Lunch](https://open.spotify.com/album/0awOXgqBtA1bUu44W08g6q?si=T9GgiqRxTAOJZGsU-ck8Ug)

The frontman is as eccentric as the music he makes. Iggy Pop opens the album with a wandering
preamble, what more do you want?

### [Liz Lawrence - Pity Party](https://open.spotify.com/album/0OoiqQEy97c07vOc5b9VRh?si=iFKPB1fERNOvEIb0-K_xpg)

Kind of indie pop, I suppose? USP & None of My Friends are stand out singles.

### [The Specials - Encore](https://open.spotify.com/album/2K7Z8kR4tsXDIkS0jWLkwZ?si=2zqcoHHgQbiaQxUZsRey9g)

Classic 80s two-tone/ska. They're still great, still angry about the state of the world, still
singing about it - thank God.

### [Stella Donnelly - Beware of the Dogs](https://open.spotify.com/album/1pKIMs0GEePXjDC2EiYEb7?si=NPi-ZbvtR7eZ_S7YJNgOhA)

I just love her voice, fortunately her tracks also are great. Singing songs about topics such as
sexual assault, exploitation of women à la Harvey Weinstein and her abortion in her late teens/early
20s.

### [black midi - Schlagenheim](https://open.spotify.com/album/14LuwckQuyWIvVlKrYuLzP?si=eWie66cwSbWDcosT4xcm-Q)

Noise/math rock, very experimental, all good if that's your thing. (It's one of my things, it
seems).

### [Girl Band - The Talkies](https://open.spotify.com/album/7CcsQ8Y3s65IZCoaBrZuIT?si=YJtLEkeZRuqz0YHKTjSYkg)

The album opens with a recording of the lead singer having a panic attack in the recording studio.
More noise rock, still experimental. Their first album a few years ago inspired the likes of black
midi and more.

### [Brittany Howard - Jamie](https://open.spotify.com/album/5xQrvHK0YbNaFslrvJYMNR?si=6YICl0uiRhGNdxk9_oyVXQ)

Of Alabama Shakes fame, this fills a hole in my heart that they left behind, but this more than
makes up for it. Brittany Howard explores similar sounds in this album that she did with Alabama
Shakes, but goes further, delving into other genres like jazz, R&B, lofi hip hop and whatever 13th
Century Metal is.

### [Girl Ray - Girl](https://open.spotify.com/album/5uToqdsQXa0200HXDFZE9l?si=m1j0g9wHTVaC38zhFsouxg)

Kind of dream/bedroom pop. What even are genres these days?

### [Faye Webster - Atlanta Millionaires Club](https://open.spotify.com/album/4vt0V1SmkaK1Y440P5Nsb4?si=8fM2OxlHShquPeZjtHcYqg)

I refer to this as surfer country and I love it. Also, I think it's my favourite album cover of the
  year.

### [Awkward Family Portraits - Everything We've Done Up Until Now Except What We've Done Since](https://open.spotify.com/album/5cpr8BQn1rSfNExCwJ41CZ?si=8xiLXRBzSKGwNhyCoksPvg)

Glasgow bluegrass band singing about such topics as climate change and nights out on the lash.
Because why not. Nathan and I saw them live and I can safely say they were a lot of fun. I have a
video if you want.

### [Oh Sees - Face Stabber](https://open.spotify.com/album/2asqm6ydqbRKZKbXfGIhrX?si=NL5tgGHHTMeissEKi_l9iw)

This album opens with them sampling a squeaky toy and that kind of defines the album going forwards.
Lots of psychedelic & progressive rock influences. There's a squeaky toy opening the album, why are
you still reading this?

### [Pip Blom - Boat](https://open.spotify.com/album/4wFv5bgaDQX7qABoTMTEsN?si=Q-IXMQBrRkGI2pckXQGXRg)

I missed out on seeing these guys live - God damn it, Nathan, this would have been better than DnD.
Dutch indie pop band, playful pop covering actual angst.

### [Trash Kit - Horizon](https://open.spotify.com/album/2Fkm5Qr2HJjscx4GTkTEHe?si=Qup2ElUSTAiV0dePxnmXzw)

Having spent time in their own bands like Shopping (check them out), Trash Kit came together for
their own special blend of post-punk, Afrobeat and more. The drums come in crashing and the vocals
are more akin to sprechgesang than singing. Through the sound, there's a lot of very good lyrics.

### [Gauche - A People's History of Gauche](https://open.spotify.com/album/6iFUgVpsYPKALrEWZX86KI?si=WPNuvboiRHmd5gEaOCBGuA)

The singer of Gauche has a bizarre voice when singing, but I find it rather draws me in. Nathan
disagrees. Mad post-punk but all kinds of fun. The upbeat music covers the underlying song topics.

### [Hemlock Ernst & Kenny Segal - Back At the House](https://open.spotify.com/album/0LVKPyfLFEy6PQ19z8Zawq?si=U8mlD0A6QGyqDpCVg1sgVQ)

Hemlock Ernst, better known as the singer of Future Islands, finally released a full album having
featured on countless alternative hip-hop tracks. It was everything I've been waiting for from him.

### [Tacocat - This Mess Is a Place](https://open.spotify.com/album/7l3uVSD4WCT8pBvrAMlxnB?si=sIkkG6mJSCe0G6YnRUC7bw)

Upbeat indie pop. Also their band name is palindromic, which is fun.

### [GIRLI - Odd One Out](https://open.spotify.com/album/3jOfFcZ3wVfyyU3yftEKYf?si=eG58hQ-NTjW3ipB_RJljIw)

This is featured in a Spotify playlist called Glitter Bomb, which should tell you enough about this
in itself. Electrifying pop-electronica --- the kind of thing listened to by girls finishing six
form, freshers and - apparently - Nathan and me.

### [The Divine Comedy - Office Politics](https://open.spotify.com/album/4pnX8RkztAQj5EgyKKPHyL?si=j72GoxNISOaU1DveKLPdEg)

Neil Hannon again plays around with whichever genres he feels like. Supposedly a concept album about
an office - one to listen to at work and try to match up the characters with your colleagues?

### [Mac DeMarco - Here Comes the Cowboy](https://open.spotify.com/album/67PsnkYVPNpEsZffyTWGgW?si=QfruTwwlSMCU-Jrg-qrzIA)

Despite the allegations of ripping off Mitski's album from last year, Mac has clearly decided to
just write music for himself rather than sounding like Mac DeMarco. Also, there's a song called Choo
Choo.

### [Loyle Carner - Not Waving, But Drowning](https://open.spotify.com/album/1kokRXXxrJzhxdMo0vsVDV?si=-30WHPDOTluNmkwKi2PawA)

I'm convinced Loyle Carner can do no wrong. He continues to produce fantastic, heartfelt music and
is possibly one of the best voices in UK hip-hop right now. (Sorry, Duncan, I know you're all about
CASISDEAD.)

### [Little Simz - GREY Area](https://open.spotify.com/album/4Wwm4xg2748zhYuzDRFTgY?si=2tP_ER0mTASncLQeewMQAQ)

I love Little Simz and this album only deepened that love. This album has been talked about **a
lot** this year, so I'm not going to say too much about it. That said, I'm still gutted that she
didn't end up opening for Gorillaz in Glasgow. Maybe I was just late. We'll never know. Anyway,
listen to this, it's good for you.

### [Sleaford Mods - Eton Alive](https://open.spotify.com/album/3QiU8JCc97mcqfJ3caEMzs?si=gU2Ax26CTyi7y8dLbUIISA)

One of the top 10 albums of the year. The music almost sounds as Northern as the vocalist. It's
grating, almost caustic, but it delivers some biting commentary on modern Britain from a working
class perspective.
